Flevobézier: an Inkscape extension fitting Bézier curves
Documentation by Parcly Taxel / Jeremy Tan, 2015
parclytaxel.tumblr.com / parclytaxel.deviantart.com / @Parcly_Taxel
CC BY-SA 4.0 / FAL 1.3

1. Introduction
Inkscape's node tool is terrible when it comes to deleting nodes.
Suppose you draw a three-node path that looks like half of an astroid
or a V with its ends curved outwards and then delete the middle node;
you never get back something even remotely resembling the original path.
Similarly, path simplification and the pencil tool at very high smoothing
levels sometimes deforms the input beyond recognition. The many improvements
made in 0.91 have not resolved this issue.

There is a function in the experimental 2geom package,
cubics_fitting_curvature(), that makes an honest attempt at the problem.[1]
However, its utility is limited by its fixed number of arguments and
its inability to generate splines of more than one curve or line.
Therefore I have written this extension to Inkscape called Flevobézier
(named after the newest of the Netherlands' twelve provinces, Flevoland)
which I and fellow Inkscape vectorist Liam P. White have found more useful.
It is my hope that the extension will be incorporated into 2geom and
ultimately into the standard Inkscape distribution itself.

2. History
At the time of the program's creation I was a huge fan of the TV series
My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic. I was having difficulty with vectoring
out some ponies from that show – as well as a whole host of associated
original characters – because vectoring convention dictates that the fewest
possible number of nodes be used and yet the outlines I was up against were
often very complex and nontrivial. So I thought to myself: "Can an extension
to Inkscape be written to assist me in this 'interesting' task?" (Of course,
over-reliance on computer scripts is never a good thing.) My literature search
on DuckDuckGo turned up nothing save for a Stack Overflow question,[2] a thesis
written by a US Naval Postgraduate School student[3] and a personal GitHub site
discussing the many operations performable on Bézier curves.[4] This last
resource would prove immensely helpful in the final program's assembly.

With few threads to start from I tried implementing the thesis, which had the
Gauss–Newton method at its core. This exposed me to many concepts in linear
algebra and other fields I never learned in class (somewhat ironic given
that I had just completed a linear algebra module): Jacobian matrices,
the Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse, least squares, partial derivatives and so on.
Alas, all my attempts along this route computed for too long or gave highly
inaccurate results. So there I was, about to give up, when one of my dreams
drove the definitive solution straight into my head.

This documentation was written as a supplement to an updated version of the
extension which simplifies the code using a node class and a more efficient
fitting algorithm to facilitate translation into other object-oriented
programming languages.

3. Usage
To use the extension, just place it in the folder for custom extensions (on
most Linux machines this is ~/.config/inkscape/extensions); remember to
include the .corresponding .inx file so Inkscape will recognise it. Then
select the paths you want simplified and go to Extensions > Generate from Path
> Flevobézier – no input is required after that, it is a pure script.

4. Operation
Because compound paths can be treated as sets of simple paths, the first part
of the script does just that: it looks for moveto (M) commands in the SVG data
and cuts just before them, producing simple paths which may be open or closed.
These new paths are then processed independently, first by discarding all data
except the nodes' positions (considering handles is out of the question) and
then converting the result into a list of node objects. This last thing is the
most important part of the update to Flevobézier since it enhances readability
and simplicity of the code.

While I have somewhat of an aversion to object-oriented programming I felt that
in this case the encapsulation was necessary. The node class has only two
variables, x and y, which indicate its position on the SVG canvas. Various
elementary operators (+, *, etc.) are overridden so they can be used per se in
the main code to denote vector addition and subtraction among other things.
Afterwards, a bunch of functions pertaining to Euclidean geometry and linear
algebra are provided.

From the overarching code the list of nodes and a Boolean variable indicating
whether the path is open or closed are passed to the main, eponymous algorithm.
I call it a sliding window method since the actions performed depend on the
nodes within a creeping slice of the node list which is associated with a
cubic Bézier curve.

This so-called window starts with the list's first two nodes and then extends
towards the end one node at a time until (1) the end is reached or (2) an over
condition is met. One of these over criteria is the linear angle formed by the
(updated) window's last three nodes; the criterion is met if this falls below
60 degrees, formerly 90. If it is not met, a new Bézier curve is computed to
fit every node in the window as follows:
* 3 nodes: Calculate a quadratic curve passing through all nodes and losslessly
  convert it to a cubic curve.
* 4 nodes: Calculate a cubic curve passing through all nodes using cubicfrom4().
Both computations use the very definition of Bézier curves and are guaranteed
to produce exact fits to the nodes; they cannot generate an over condition.
The Bézier curve parameters of the interior points are derived by assuming
that the curve is a polyline and then extracting the relative lengths of
the points in question along the line with chords().

When five or more nodes lie within the window, however, there may be no exact
fit. This is where the program's innovation lies: mimicking how humans adjust
handles to achieve the best fit to an arbitrary curve, it adjusts the handles
of the current (working) cubic curve in a process I named stressing. This stress()
function takes in a list of nodes and uses cubicfrom4() (the relevant sets of
points being those including the endpoints and having their other two points
symmetrically placed around the centre) to make an initial guess, then refines
that guess by computing the projections of some interior nodes onto the curve
and shifting the handles in the opposite direction of these projections by a
fixed factor of themselves. The over signal to start a new window may be
raised here if the curve is found incapable of adequately fitting to all nodes.

Specifically, the projection function implements a binary search over paramater
(t) values from 0 to 1 as described in section 26 of [4]. After the initial guess
runs through selected node sets in a certain order, the stressing algorithm goes
through those same sets in reverse order five times, finding the projections of
the middle nodes on the curve and simultaneously moving the corresponding handles
by 2.5 times the projection vectors. This last multiple induces overstressing,
which unlike its engineering counterpart is beneficial and speeds up convergence.
All this while the errors (projection lengths) are being logged and they are
returned as the second item of stress()'s output tuple; an over signal is raised
if the maximum error is greater than a third of the minimum segment length
within the window, a rather conservative estimate.

In any case, after over is signalled or the end is reached the current curve
is written to the variable res(ult) which thus contains the simplified path. Not
the finish line however – after the dust has settled a routine then identifies
nodes whose handles make an angle of more than 160 degrees (this deemed as the
minimum angle a casual look perceives as straight) and proceeds to smooth them
out. This straightening does not change the handle lengths, only their angles.
A very complicated expression is used to determine the directions each handle
should turn. With all the computational carnage finished, final formatting of
the output to pass back to the overarching code happens and the long-awaited
strings are put back into the SVG file.

If immediately after an over by exceeding the stressing error bound comes an over
by too acute an angle or the path's end, the script backs up to the window
causing the first over and stresses again without the error bound. This makes
some curves look prettier.

5. Limitations
As hinted at in [5], a quick documentation of the old version of Flevobézier,
like all extensions the output can be improved on manually. In particular,
since the window only slides one way an inspection of the output nodes can take
into account the other way and lead to a more pleasing solution.

References
[1] https://bazaar.launchpad.net/~lib2geom-hackers/lib2geom/trunk/view/head:/src/2geom/sbasis-geometric.cpp#L609
[2] https://stackoverflow.com/questions/12643079/b%C3%A9zier-curve-fitting-with-scipy
[3] www.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a350611.pdf
[4] https://pomax.github.io/bezierinfo
[5] https://derpiboo.ru/740631
